# Development Models

Created: May 8, 2022 2:08 PM
Tags: Development Model, SAT

The problem solving methodology is a systematic way of solving problems that divides the problem into 4 distinct stages,
the Analysis, Design, Development and Evaluation phases. The problem is then worked through using different development
models, as the process is not necessarily linear and can be executed in different ways. It is a methodology or a
framework, and the way in which it is executed is known as a Development Model. For our purposes in this SAT, there are
3 different development models:

## Waterfall

The waterfall method is a block by block development model, where each section is signed off and there is no going back.
It moves through the stages of the PSM in a linear fashion and are completed in order before moving onto the next one,
each stage being a dependency for the next. The advantages of this is it’s a very easy to understand process which is
good for time management and allocation, and you only really have to do one thing at a time so you can allocate
resources effectively. On the other hand, it lacks in its flexibility in that different stages cannot be revisited and
is not suitable for larger more complex projects where many things have to be going on at once to be efficient. It also
means that a working prototype or mockup will not be available later in the project.

## Agile

The Agile development model is one that achieves flexibility and communication with the client/audience through many
iterations, called “sprints”. Each iteration goes through the PSM in five stages, gradually improving the software
solution so the client can see changes frequently. This method of continuous development has the benefit of being very
flexible and allowing many changes to take place, having a close connection with the client to get exactly what they
want. On the other hand, it requires quite a bit of skill from the developers and introduces easy scope creep that is
not ideal, with hard deadlines not being the easiest to set. The Agile development model is well suites to when the
needs of the client are not well defined and you need frequent changes, and when documentation is minimal with bare
minimum planning required to start the project.

## Spiral

Similar to the Agile Model, the Spiral Development Model utilises iterations to create the software solution, going
around until a minimum viable product is created. It’s somewhat half way between the Waterfall and Agile models, not
necessarily wanting continuous development but rather managing risks. It is split up into 4 phases, where prototypes are
made, the risks are analysed and evaluated. This model is beneficial in that traditional processes remain but can still
scale to be larger, and prototypes are developed quickly with risks being fast to deal with, but on the other hand, it
can be more expensive than other models and creates an unnecessary amount of stages for small projects. This model is
best suited to projects where risks are expected and need to be prevented fast, the client is not too sure how to
proceed and the product needs to be released quickly and can be updated after that.

# Selected Model

I have opted to select Agile as my development model due to its flexibility and close connection with the client. I
didn’t quite think Waterfall was suitable for my needs, as I have an audience that I am working very closely with, and
it doesn’t sound too logical to not be able to go back and make any changes based on active feedback from my audience.
Agile seemed better suited due to the close involvement with clients along with rapid releases that are tangible. I also
don’t necessarily need *too* much documentation, besides what is required by the subject, as this is a project I am
working on by myself and others do not need information about the software solution to work on it with me. Mainly, the
rigidity of Waterfall was not appealing, and if a major roadblock was found in the middle of the project that was not
accounted for before, the model would not be too flexible to adapt. Finally, I believed Spiral was not the best choice
as it seemed to take up more time than the other models, creating an unnecessary amount of stages. Unlike the scenarios
where Spiral is better suited, my clients are pretty confident with how to proceed and I do not need a quick product
release or expect many risks with quick responses. As such, the decision lay mostly between Waterfall and Agile, but
Agile was selected due to its ability to be more flexible with changes to the project.